---
layout: post
title:  "The Racketeer"
author: "John Grisham"
categories: [ Fiction ]
image: assets/images/theracketeer.jpg
author_image: assets/images/grisham.jpg
author_description: "John Ray Grisham Jr. is an American novelist, attorney, politician, and activist, best known for his popular legal thrillers. His books have been translated into 42 languages and published worldwide."
featured: false
hidden: false
rating: 4
purchase_url: "https://amzn.to/2ExO82m"
---
The Racketeer is a legal thriller novel written by John Grisham that was released on October 23, 2012 by Doubleday with an initial printing of 1.5 million copies. It was one of the best selling books of 2012 and spent several weeks atop various best seller lists.

The protagonist Malcolm Bannister, an African American and former United States Marine, is an attorney in a modest Virginia small-town law firm. A real estate transaction which he undertook in good faith turns out to have involved the purchase of a secluded hunting lodge where a crooked Capitol Hill lobbyist invited corrupt Congressmen for booze and drug-fueled orgies with underage girls. When the scandal is exposed, Bannister is caught up in a large FBI sweep, and his name is added to many others on a 100-page racketeering charge sheet as his protestations of innocence are ignored. He is charged under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), convicted and given a 10-year prison term. The story begins with Bannister half way through his term; he has since been disbarred, divorced by his wife, lost contact with his son and is nursing a bitter grudge against the federal government and the FBI.

After hearing of the brutal murders of federal judge Raymond Fawcett and his mistress, Bannister makes a deal with the FBI to give them the name of the killer, in exchange for his release and being made a member of the United States Federal Witness Protection Program, supposedly to protect him from the killer's associates. He informs them that Quinn Rucker, a drug dealer he met in prison, had vowed to escape and murder Fawcett as revenge for a failed bribery attempt in which the judge took $500,000 but didn't follow through on his end of the deal. Acting on information from Bannister, the FBI arrest Quinn and despite having no evidence against him, manipulate him into confessing to the murder using legal interrogation tactics. Following the indictment, Quinn claims to have been unlawfully coerced into the confession.

After Quinn's indictment, Bannister is released and given a new face and identity, Max Reed Baldwin. After the FBI discovers that Rucker's gang knows Bannister's whereabouts and is seeking revenge, Bannister leaves the program and goes off the radar. He sets up a fake film company and meets another man he had met in prison, Nathan Cooley. Thanks to the Witness Protection Program, Nathan doesn't recognize Bannister, who convinces him to take part in the filming of a documentary about corruption in the Drug Enforcement Administration and the FBI. He rents a private plane, ostensibly to fly the two to Florida, but drugs Nathan during the flight and has the plane fly to Jamaica, framing him for drug smuggling and gun running while doing so. As the only white prisoner in a jail where all other prisoners and the guards are black, Nathan finds himself the subject of vicious bullying from the other inmates.

Bannister tells Nathan that the Jamaican officials are the ones who framed him, and are demanding $500,000 for his release. Nathan tells Bannister of a secret stash of gold worth $8.5 million hidden in his backyard, which Bannister arranges for Vanessa, his lover and accomplice, to steal, before he returns to America. After the two of them hide the gold in a series of safety deposit boxes, Vanessa - in reality Quinn's sister - reveals to Quinn's lawyer that her brother has an alibi for the time of Fawcett's murder. The FBI, after receiving an email about the gold from Bannister, realize that he and Quinn have been working together; Quinn's arrest and indictment was all part of a plan to enable Bannister to leave prison and take the gold from Fawcett's killer, before clearing Quinn's name.

In exchange for immunity for both him and Quinn, Bannister reveals to the FBI that Nathan is the real killer of Fawcett. Before he was imprisoned, Nathan discovered the gold stash - which Fawcett had taken from a mining company, Armanna Mines, in exchange for a favorable ruling giving them permission to mine uranium in the region - and told Bannister about his plans to steal it while in prison in the hope of convincing the attorney to get him an early release, after refusing to accept that Bannister was unable to do so. Bannister promises to send a bar of gold with Nathan's fingerprints to the FBI as proof of his guilt, while also anticipating that Nathan will make a full confession to the murder in order to get out of Jamaica. Bannister warns the FBI to investigate the bribery that took place between Judge Fawcett and Armanna Mines, or he will give the story to the press. The novel ends with Bannister, Vanessa, Quinn - revealed to be Bannister's best friend - and Quinn's brother Dee Ray - who had helped fund the operation - celebrating in Antigua with all the gold.